README.md, before:

This is source code for [summer.nixos.org](https://summer.nixos.org) website.


## Contribute

To contribute please send a Pull Request. A **preview link** is going to be
generated and added as a comment once build of the website finishes.

To develop on the website **locally** use the following commands.

```console
$ nix build ./#packages.x86_64-linux.nixos-summer-serve -o ./result-serve
# or
$ nix-build . -A packages.x86_64-linux.nixos-summer-serve -o ./result-serve

$ ./result-serve/bin/serve
```

Last command will build the repository and **watch for changes of the files**
in this repository. Once some file **changes it will trigger a rebuild**.

> This only works on files tracked by git! For instance, if you want to add
> images, you need to add them to git before they are included in build.

Local preview is served at **`http://127.0.0.1:8000`**.

If you are using [LiveReload](http://livereload.com/extensions/) browser
extension the browser is going to be reloaded automatically once the rebuild is
done. If you are not using LiveReload, you will have to refresh the browser
yourself.

Happy hacking!


## License

The content of the website is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution
Share Alike 4.0 International](LICENSE.txt) license.

Commit message:

Use a standard static site generator and overhaul site (#28)
* Migrate content to zola

This currently is only a skeleton, any design is missing.

* actions: Update nix

* Enable atom feeds

* Add iCal feed

It is not very pretty, but it should work.

Every announcement can optionally have event metadata. All those
announcements should also have a plain-text description that will be
shown in the iCal feed.

* Streamline flake

* Use NixOS common styles again

This also switches to less, which sadly is less integrated with zola.

Co-authored-by: Simon Bruder <simon@sbruder.de>

* Use Makefile

This simplifies the flake and more easily allows development outside of
a Nix build.

* Update readme to reflect current development workflow

* Re-import old styling

* Add navbar

* Re-import footer

* Apply reasonable styling to blog/announcements

* Add shortcode for youtube embedding

For some reason it is not possible to override Zola’s internal youtube
shortcode, so this needs to be called differently.

It can be used to either embed videos or full playlists. Videos can be
embedded like this:

{{ yt(id="h8hWX_aGGDc") }}

Playlists can be embedded like this:

{{ yt(list="PLt4-_lkyRrOO9M5dffzlLiSQrHGdbKtHQ") }}

* Add live streaming page

Co-authored-by: nrdsp <nrdsp@users.noreply.github.com>

* License code samples under CC0/public domain

* Add optional author attribution to posts

* Use relative URL as base path

Otherwise branch previews are broken.

* Reduce CLS

* videos: Add first recording of Public Lecture Series

Co-authored-by: Ilan Joselevich <personal@ilanjoselevich.com>
Co-authored-by: nrdsp <nrdsp@users.noreply.github.com>

README.md, after:

This is source code for [summer.nixos.org](https://summer.nixos.org) website.


## Contribute

To contribute please send a Pull Request. A **preview link** is going to be
generated and added as a comment once build of the website finishes.

To develop on the website **locally** you have multiple possibilities.

```console
# If you use direnv
$ make serve
# If you don’t use direnv but have flake-enabled Nix
$ nix develop -c make serve
# If you don’t have direnv or flake-enabled Nix
$ nix-shell --run "make serve"
```

The site will automatically get rebuilt if you change its content.
However, please note that changes to the style (less) or the config are not affected by this,
so after you update them,
you need to restart the server.

The server will be listening on **`http://127.0.0.1:1111`** by default,
though this can change if that port is already in use.

Happy hacking!


## License

The content of the website is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution
Share Alike 4.0 International](LICENSE.txt) license. An exception from this are
code samples, which are in the [public
domain/CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
